Banner
Title

Mobile Application
------------------
body

Get informed, be prepared, and take action to prevent underage drinking and other drug use.

SAMHSA’s new “Talk. They Hear You.” campaign mobile app helps parents and caregivers prepare for some of the most important conversations they may ever have with their kids. It shows them how to turn everyday situations into opportunities to talk with their children about alcohol and other drugs, and equips them with the necessary skills, confidence, and knowledge to start and continue these conversations as their kids get older. The app also helps prepare communities to implement and promote the campaign locally and educators to engage student assistance professionals, school leaders, and families in supporting the needs of students who may be struggling with substance use, mental health, or school-related issues. The “Talk. They Hear You.” campaign mobile app is available on the
App Store
,
Google Play
, and the
Microsoft Store
.

Watch this quick video to learn more about the app and see how it works:


Share the following one-pager with parents and caregivers, educators, and community members to help them learn more about the app and encourage them to download and start using it.
  - Download the “Talk. They Hear You.” App One-Pager (Front Only | PDF | 568 KB)
  - Download the “Talk. They Hear You.” App One-Pager (Front and Back | PDF | 921 KB)


About the “Talk. They Hear You.” App
------------------------------------

The app is designed to help parents and caregivers, educators, and communities:
  - Get Informed.Increase awareness about underage drinking and other drug use.
  - Be Prepared.Introduce skill-building techniques and share available resources and tools.
  - Take Action.Increase actions to help prevent underage drinking and other drug use.

The app features sample conversation starters, ways to keep the conversation going, an interactive practice simulation section, and the opportunity to earn badges for practicing and having real-life conversations. It also includes a resources section with informative and useful videos, fact sheets, brochures, infographics, guides/toolkits, and more.

Learn more about the
goals for these important conversations
and find other tips and information to help prevent underage drinking and other drug use on the
Parent Resources
page.

Apple and the Apple logo are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. App Store is a service mark of Apple Inc.

Google Play and the Google Play logo are trademarks of Google LLC.

Microsoft, Windows, and the Windows Store logos are trademarks of the Microsoft group of companies.
Last Updated
Last Updated: 11/06/2024