Title

Resource Documents and Manuals
------------------------------
Body

KAP develops a wide array of products, including the Treatment Improvement Protocol (TIP) series, Technical Assistance Publications (TAPs), manuals, and other resources.

TIPs
----

TIPs
are best-practice guidelines for the treatment of substance use. The Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (CSAT) draws on the experience and knowledge of clinical, research, and administrative experts to produce the TIPs, which are distributed to a growing number of facilities and individuals across the country.

The series includes training manuals that provide program managers with the tools they need to provide flexible and interactive in-service training on state-of-the art models and practices for treating substance use disorders.

Quick Guides
------------

Each
Quick Guide
clearly and concisely presents information from a TIP in a pocket-size booklet. Each guide is divided into sections to help treatment and service providers quickly locate relevant material.

KAP Keys
--------

Based on TIPs,
KAP Keys
are handy tools that can include assessment or screening instruments, checklists, or summaries of treatment phases. The KAP Keys enable the busy clinician or program administrator to locate information easily and to use this information to enhance treatment services.

TAPs
----

TAPs
are compilations from various federal, state, programmatic, and clinical sources that provide practical guidance and information related to the delivery of treatment services to individuals with substance use disorders.

Matrix Manuals
--------------

The
Matrix Manuals
are ideally used together and provide clear instructions on implementing the Matrix treatment approach for the treatment of stimulant use disorders. These manuals and workbooks grew out of the treatment interventions tested in CSAT’s Methamphetamine Treatment Project. These products integrate treatment elements from several strategies, including cognitive behavioral therapy, motivational interviewing, psychoeducation, family education, and mutual-help (12-Step) program involvement.

Other Resources
---------------

KAP provides resources on anger management for behavioral health professionals working with individuals experiencing a mental and/or substance use disorder, including its
Anger Management for Substance Use Disorder and Mental Health Clients: A Cognitive–Behavioral Therapy Manual
and
companion workbook
.

In addition, KAP developed
resources on marijuana use and misuse
, including the publication
Brief Counseling for Marijuana Dependence: A Manual for Treating Adults
.
Last Updated
Last Updated: 05/08/2024