Banner
Title

About RecoverMe
---------------
Body

The RecoverMe campaign connects those in recovery with empowering, practical, and encouraging resources to support their individual journey with substance use and mental health challenges.

The campaign's primary goal is to increase the number of young adults who are taking steps toward long-term recovery. To support this, the campaign will:
  - Raise awareness about the connection between substance use and mental health.
  - Improve the belief among young adults that recovery is possible, and many effective options exist to support their unique journey.
  - Reduce perceived stigma about recovery, substance use, and mental health.

Priority Audiences
------------------

The primary audience is young adults, aged 18–25, who currently are and want to continue to be in recovery. The campaign will also reach young adults who want to be in recovery and are in an active process to get help with their drug and/or alcohol use and mental health challenges.

SAMHSA recognizes that substance use and mental health conditions can affect young adults in unique ways and are shaped by personal experience, background, and geographic location. This campaign will consider these influences to ensure support is relevant to all young adults.

Partnerships
------------

Strategic partnerships are key to amplifying the impact of the campaign and reaching its goal. Understanding the importance of community, RecoverMe relies on its partners to serve as trusted messengers and increase the reach and resonance of campaign messages.

SAMHSA would like to recognize its partners who aided in campaign development including
Young People in Recovery
,
The National Alliance on Mental Illness
,
Latino Behavioral Health Services
, and
Georgia Council for Recovery
.

Interested in spreading the word? Use the
RecoverMe Campaign Partner Toolkit
to help young adults navigate their unique journey with substance use and mental health challenges.

Why RecoverMe Matters
---------------------

According to the
2023 National Survey on Substance Use and Health (PDF | 642 KB)
, nearly half (49.6%) or 16.0 million young adults aged 18 to 25 reported having a mental health or substance use condition in the past year.
1

Through carefully crafted resources and tools, RecoverMe supports young adults and considers their mental health needs and substance use challenges, together. SAMHSA recognizes that recovery looks different for everyone and as part of its mission, works to improve the lives of individuals living with substance use and mental health conditions.

If you have a question about the RecoverMe campaign, contact
RecoverMeCampaign@samhsa.hhs.gov
.

1.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2024). Key substance use and mental health indicators in the United States: Results from the
2023 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publication No. PEP24-07-021, NSDUH Series H-59)
. Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Last Updated
Last Updated: 12/11/2024