Title

Opioid Treatment Program Information for Providers
--------------------------------------------------
Body

Division of Pharmacologic Therapies
-----------------------------------

SAMHSA’s Division of Pharmacologic Therapies (DPT) works to oversee and facilitate treatment for substance use disorders. DPT, part of SAMHSA’s
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (CSAT)
, manages the day-to-day oversight activities necessary to implement federal regulations on the use of substance use disorder medications such as
methadone
and
buprenorphine
for the treatment of opioid use disorder (OUD). DPT supports the certification and accreditation of more than 1,900 opioid treatment programs (OTPs) that collectively treat more than 600,000 patients each year.

Contact DPT

240-276-2700
DPT@samhsa.hhs.gov

Find Information
----------------
- Become an Opioid Treatment Program (OTP)To provide services for opioid use disorder patients, OTPs must successfully complete the certification and accreditation process and meet other requirements outlined in 42 CFR 8.
- State Opioid Treatment AuthoritiesA listing of State Opioid Treatment Authorities (SOTA) by state in alphabetical order.
- 42 CFR Part 8 Final RulePart 8 of Title 42 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) includes the regulations that guide opioid treatment programs (OTPs); these went into effect in 2001. HHS, through the SAMHSA, revised these regulations and released the final rule in February 2024.
- Submit an Opioid Treatment Exception RequestAny deviation from the opioid treatment standards in 42 CFR 8 requires the submission and approval of the Form SMA-168 exception request.
- Take-Home Extension GuidanceThe duration of this exemption shall be for the period of one year from the end of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, or until such time that final rules revising 42 C.F.R. part 8 are published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, whichever occurs sooner.
- Notify SAMHSA of Program ChangesPer federal regulations opioid treatment programs (OTPs) must notify SAMHSA of changes to their existing program by logging into the SAMHSA OTP Extranet and submitting the online Form SMA-162: Application for Certification to Use Opioid Drugs in a Treatment Program.
- Approved Accreditation BodiesSAMHSA-approved accrediting bodies work to ensure that OTPs meet specific, nationally accepted standards for providing medications for substance use disorders.

Related Pages
-------------
Opioid Treatment Program (OTP) Compliance Officers
Federal Statutes, Regulations, and Guidelines
Provider Information on Treatment Options
Training Requirements (MATE Act) Resources
Practitioner Training Materials and Resources
Buprenorphine Quick Start Guide (PDF | 1.4 KB)
Buprenorphine Pocket Guide (PDF | 200 KB)
Federal Register: Buprenorphine Guidelines for Prescribing Practitioners
Last Updated
Last Updated: 04/02/2025