Title

Become a SAMHSA-Approved Opioid Treatment Program (OTP) Accrediting Body
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Body

Nonprofit groups or state governmental entities can apply for approval to accredit opioid treatment programs (OTPs).

In 2001, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and SAMHSA issued final regulations to establish a new oversight system for the treatment of
substance use disorders (SUDs)
. New federal regulations transferred administrative responsibility over the use of opioid medications in maintenance and detoxification treatment of SUDs from the
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) to SAMHSA (see
Certification of Opioid Treatment Programs, 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 8
).

In addition, the regulations established procedures to approve nonprofit groups or state governmental entities to become a SAMHSA-approved accrediting body.

SAMHSA-approved accrediting bodies
evaluate opioid treatment programs (OTPs) and perform an accreditation survey to ensure SAMHSA’s opioid use disorder (OUD) treatment standards are met.

SAMHSA’s
Division of Pharmacologic Therapies (DPT)
provides guidance to entities that wish to participate in SAMHSA’s OTP certification program and become an accreditor of
OTPs
. Learn more about the
certification of OTPs
.

Accreditation Guidelines
------------------------

To assist accrediting organizations and OTPs to achieve regulatory compliance, SAMHSA developed
Federal Guidelines for Opioid Treatment Programs - 2024
.

New and Renewal Applications
----------------------------

All new and renewal applicants must submit
Form SMA-163: Application for Approval as Accreditation Body
.

New applicants can submit their
SMA-163
online. Previously approved entities seeking renewal must submit their
SMA-163
through their account on the SAMHSA OTP Extranet Website. Renewal of SAMHSA approval is required every five years.

The following information is required on all
SMA-163 forms
:
  - Purpose of application (new or renewal)
  - Accreditation body name
  - Accreditation body address
  - Responsible official name
  - Responsible official address and contact information

Form SMA-163
includes a list of documents required for submission with the application. These documents should be prepared as file attachments to the online form. No applications will be reviewed until all required documentation is submitted.

Additional Assistance
---------------------

For more information about becoming a SAMHSA-approved OTP accrediting body contact SAMHSA’s DPT at
DPT@samhsa.hhs.gov
or call
240-276-2700
.
Last Updated
Last Updated: 04/02/2025