Title

What’s New
----------
Expand All
|
Collapse All

Apply for a Communities Talk Planning Stipend
---------------------------------------------

SAMHSA invites community-based organizations and institutions of higher education to apply for a
Communities Talk
planning stipend to help plan local events that advance conversations and community convenings on substance use prevention.

Organizations are encouraged to:
  - Feature youth-led activities;
  - Customize the event to meet the needs of their community;
  - Plan and promote the event using resources on the Communities Talk website; and
  - Apply by emailinginfo@communities-talk.com.

Planning stipends are limited, so apply early. Communities Talk aims to prevent alcohol and other drug misuse among youth and young adults in communities nationwide.

Learn more and apply today
.

Take Part in National Prevention Week 2025: May 11–17
-----------------------------------------------------

National Prevention Week is a public education platform showcasing the work of communities and organizations across the country that are preventing substance use and promoting positive mental health.

This year,
National Prevention Week
is taking place from May 11–17, 2025. Learn more about how you can
get involved
throughout the week and register for the events taking place. You can help promote prevention at any point throughout the year by sharing your
#MyPreventionStory
on social media, downloading SAMHSA’s
planning toolkit
,  promoting National Prevention Week, and
telling SAMHSA
about your own prevention event.

To learn more, sign up for the National Prevention Week
email list
and follow SAMHSA on
X
,
Facebook
, and
Instagram
for the latest information.

Access New Step-by-Step Guide to Implementing the Communities That HEAL (CTH) Intervention: A Community-Driven Approach to Reduce Overdose Deaths
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In 2019, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and SAMHSA launched the
HEALing Communities Study (HCS)
to determine the impact of the data-driven Communities That HEAL (CTH) intervention. The four-year study engaged 67 communities to rapidly deploy evidence-based practices to reduce opioid overdose deaths in Kentucky, Massachusetts, New York, and Ohio.

The
CTH intervention
is a multi-phased approach created by a team of opioid-overdose reduction experts that uses data and leverages community partnerships to help inform decision-making and support the uptake of evidence-based strategies to reduce overdose deaths. As part of the CTH, researchers collaborated with community coalitions to develop the Opioid-Overdose Continuum of Care Approach (ORCCA)—a framework to help communities select and implement effective practices best suited to their needs. The ORCCA menu includes strategies proven to reduce overdoses, such as opioid education and naloxone distribution, medication treatment for opioid use disorder, and safer opioid prescribing and dispensing practices.

HCS has developed a new resource that breaks down each phase of the CTH program for potential adopters into seven manageable “Road Maps.” The Road Maps serve as a step-by-step guidebook for implementing activities in each phase.

Road Maps include:
  - Phase 0: Preparation
  - Phase 1: Getting Started
  - Phase 2: Getting Organized
  - Phase 3: Community Profiles and Data Dashboards
  - Phase 4: Community Action Planning
  - Phase 5: Implement and Monitor
  - Phase 6: Sustainability Planning

Learn more at
Communities That HEAL (CTH) Intervention
.

Learn About Effective Strategies to Reduce Opioid Overdose Deaths in Your Community
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The
Overdose Crisis Community Decision Tool
is a free web-based tool that assists community decision-makers and leaders in selecting proven strategies to reduce opioid overdose deaths. The tool is a guide to selecting evidence-based strategies from the NIH HEALing Communities Study (HCS). The HCS put into action evidence-based strategies chosen by local communities to reduce opioid overdose deaths. The Overdose Crisis Community Decision Tool extends the knowledge and lessons learned from selecting and implementing those evidence-based strategies.

The tool provides:
  - A customized list of evidence-based strategies to reduce opioid overdose deaths matched to a community’s goals, needs, and current resources available;
  - Practical guidance and resources for getting started; and
  - Real-world examples of how HCS communities put overdose reduction strategies into practice.

Who can benefit from using this tool?
  - Members of community coalitions and settlement councils;
  - Elected officials and leaders involved in opioid overdose reduction planning;
  - Anyone responsible for decisions related to the use of funds designated for the overdose crisis response; and/or
  - Anyone interested in learning about effective strategies to reduce opioid overdose deaths.

The Overdose Crisis Community Decision Tool was designed to assist local decision makers who are aware of their community’s needs and want to consider all evidence-based options for reducing opioid overdose deaths. No technical expertise or data is required to use the tool; anyone with any level of knowledge can complete and understand the recommendations the tool offers.

Learn more and access the
Overdose Crisis Community Decision Tool
.

Check Out DEA’s Operation Prevention, Including a New Virtual Field Trip
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Operation Prevention
is a collaboration between DEA and Discovery Education to provide free online tools that support every member of the community with the power of substance use prevention. Designed for educators, families, and professionals, these tools are designed to help kickstart life-saving conversations with students in grades 3–12.

The Parent Toolkit resource (available in both
English (PDF | 2.7 MB)
and
Spanish (PDF | 1.9 MB)
) provides families with information on the warning signs of prescription opioid misuse and a guide to prevention and intervention. In addition,
virtual field trips
empower middle and high school students to confront the realities of substance use through engaging virtual explorations. The all-new “An Ounce of Prevention” virtual field trip introduces students to a variety of individuals working on the ground to make a real difference against fentanyl and fake pills.

Check out these and other tools from
Operation Prevention
.

Get the Facts on FAKE PILLS: Tips for Parents and Caregivers
------------------------------------------------------------

DEA’s fact sheet, “
What Every Parent and Caregiver Needs to Know About FAKE PILLS (PDF | 848 KB)
,” helps parents and caregivers learn the makeup, appearance, and physical and mental effects of fentanyl and fake pills containing fentanyl made to look like pharmaceuticals. The fact sheet, available in both
English (PDF | 848 KB)
and
Spanish (PDF | 334 KB)
, also addresses how children might get fentanyl, why parents and caregivers should be concerned, and tips for parents and caregivers.

Watch Prevention Profiles: Take Five with Oliver Tacto
------------------------------------------------------

This month’s episode of DEA’s
Prevention Profiles: Take Five
podcast features an encore episode of Rich Lucey’s interview with Oliver Tacto, Ph.D., Dean of Student Wellness at Maryville University. During the interview, Dr. Tacto discusses the university’s Eight Dimensions of Wellness and how they align with preventing drug use among the university’s students. The interview also addresses how to focus on prevention of drug use, prescription drug misuse, and impaired driving.
Watch the recorded podcast here
.

In Case You Missed It, Check This Out!
--------------------------------------
  - The “Talk. They Hear You.” campaign’smobile applicationhelps parents and caregivers who want to turn everyday situations into opportunities to have conversations about alcohol and other drugs. Download it today from the App Store, Google Play, or the Microsoft Store.
  - TheScreen4Successtool screens for health, wellness, and well-being by asking questions about a child’s life. It’s a quick and easy way to identify areas where someone may benefit from more support and provides local and national resources to help address those concerns. Access it on your mobile device by downloading the “Talk. They Hear You.” campaign’s mobile app and selecting the Screening button from the app’s main navigation.
Last Updated
Last Updated: 03/31/2025