Title

Communities Talk to Prevent Alcohol and Other Drug Misuse
---------------------------------------------------------
Communities Talk Intro

Communities can move mountains when they talk, share, and take action to prevent alcohol and other drug misuse. Each year, community-based organizations of all kinds—including local chapters of national organizations, community and youth-led coalitions, colleges, and universities nationwide—hold creative events and activities that mobilize their communities to both learn about substance use and put prevention strategies in place.

Since 2006, thousands of these activities have been held across the country, supported by SAMHSA planning stipends that can go a long way in making the activities more strategic, collaborative, well-attended, and action-oriented. Youth-led events are among the most impactful of these activities and are encouraged.

In addition to the planning stipends, SAMHSA provides planning and promotion tools to help organizers design, promote, conduct, and evaluate their activities.

The
Communities Talk
cycle is now open! If you haven’t received an invitation and are interested in participating, email
info@communities-talk.com
to request an invitation.

Follow
#CommunitiesTalk
for the latest news.

Getting Started
---------------

The Planning and Promotion Toolkit includes everything you need to know to begin organizing a prevention activity in your community.

Mini-Campaigns
--------------

Mini-campaigns provide insights into specific populations or strategies that can help prevention take root. They are research-based and include tested messaging and tools so that communities and those working in prevention have every opportunity to push prevention forward.

"Communities TalkAbout Prevention" Podcast
------------------------------------------

Listen to organizations share their stories on how they advance prevention in their communities.

Tips and Resources
------------------

Many tools, insights, and resources are available to help activity hosts identify and meet their prevention goals through
Communities Talk
.

What's New
----------

Read the latest news to help you conduct successful
Communities Talk
activities.

Prevention Stories
------------------

Prevention Stories demonstrate the many creative ways that event hosts engage their communities in prevention and highlight key outcomes that help create lasting impacts on communities.
Last Updated
Last Updated: 03/31/2025