Title

Trauma and Violence
-------------------
What is Trauma?

What is Trauma?
---------------

SAMHSA describes individual trauma as an event or circumstance resulting in: physical harm, emotional harm, and/or life-threatening harm.

Individual trauma results from an event, series of events, or set of circumstances that is experienced by an individual as physically or emotionally harmful or life threatening and that has lasting adverse effects on the individual’s functioning and mental, physical, social, emotional, or spiritual well-being.
hero
Body

Who is Affected by Trauma?
--------------------------

Trauma has no boundaries regarding age, gender, socioeconomic status, race, ethnicity, or sexual orientation. Trauma is a common experience for
adults and children
in American communities, and it is especially common in the lives of people with mental and substance use disorders. For this reason, the need to address trauma is increasingly seen as an important part of effective behavioral health care and an integral part of the healing and recovery process.

Effects of Trauma
-----------------

The effects of traumatic events place a heavy burden on individuals, families, and communities. Although many people who experience a traumatic event will go on with their lives without lasting negative effects, others will have difficulties and experience traumatic
stress reactions
. How someone responds to a traumatic experience is personal. If there is a strong support system in place, little or no prior traumatic experiences, and if the individual has many resilient qualities, it may not affect his or her mental health.

Research has shown that traumatic experiences are associated with both behavioral health and chronic physical health conditions, especially those traumatic events that occur during childhood. Substance use, mental health conditions, and other risky behaviors have been linked with traumatic experiences. Because these behavioral health concerns can present challenges in relationships, careers, and other aspects of life, it is important to understand the nature and impact of trauma, and to
explore healing
.

Trauma-Informed Approaches
--------------------------

SAMHSA is dedicated to promoting trauma-informed care for individuals with mental health and substance use disorders. By emphasizing safety, trust, collaboration, and empowerment, SAMHSA aims to create supportive, recovery-focused environments.

Child Trauma
------------

Children are among the most vulnerable after traumatic events or disasters. Traumatic stress occurs when a child (0-18 years) feels intensely threatened by an event they experience or witness.

Trauma-Related SAMHSA Programs
------------------------------
- Interagency Task Force on Trauma-Informed Care
- National Child Traumatic Stress Initiative
- Resiliency in Communities After Stress and Trauma
- School-Based Trauma-Informed Support
Last Updated
Last Updated: 11/08/2024