Title

Submit an Opioid Treatment Exception Request
--------------------------------------------
Body

Instructions on how to request exceptions to the federal standards for opioid use disorder (OUD) treatment.

Certification of Opioid Treatment Programs, 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 8
provides federal standards for the administration and management of opioid treatment. Any deviation from the opioid treatment standards in 42 CFR 8 requires the submission and approval of the Form SMA-168 exception request.

Failure to submit the Form SMA-168 exception request and obtain approval from the
state opioid treatment authority
and SAMHSA prior to providing care that deviates from the federal opioid treatment standards constitutes a serious regulatory violation. This type of violation may threaten an OTP’s accreditation and certification and bring it out of compliance with state and federal regulations.

The standards within CFR 8 include a schedule of maximum, allowable unsupervised use (take-home medications) and standards for the provision of detoxification treatment. On occasion, patients in opioid treatment programs (OTPs) may need exceptions from the federal opioid treatment standards. Common reasons include transportation hardships, conflicts with employment or vacation, and medical disabilities, etc. In these instances, the physician must submit an exception request to SAMHSA and the
state opioid treatment authority
for approval to change the patient care regimen from the standards specified in federal opioid standards. The time-in-treatment requirements are not applicable for patients receiving buprenorphine products, if an OTP practitioner determines the patient is suitable for unsupervised use (take home).

When is an Exception Request Not Required?
------------------------------------------

The 2015 modification of
42 CFR 8.12
waives OTPs from the time in treatment requirements for patients receiving buprenorphine products, if an OTP practitioner determines the patient is suitable for unsupervised use (take-home supplies).

Programs do not need to submit exception requests to SAMHSA if the care complies with treatment standards in
42 CFR 8
. When in doubt, submit. If a program has consulted the text of the federal opioid treatment standards in
42 CFR 8
and is unsure if the care it intends to provide for a patient is in compliance, then the program should submit a Form SMA-168 exception request on the
SAMHSA OTP Extranet website
.

There are no penalties for submitting an exception request when one is not required. However, failure to submit and obtain approval from SAMHSA and (where applicable) the state opioid treatment authority before providing care that deviates from the federal opioid treatment standards constitutes a serious regulatory violation. That violation may threaten a program’s federal and state compliance, accreditation, and certification.

Practitioners shall consider the following take-home criteria (8 take-home criteria) as defined in
42 CFR 8
and outlined in t determining whether a patient is responsible in handling any take-home medications for unsupervised use:
  - Exhibit no recent drug use
  - Attend a clinic regularly
  - Exhibit no serious behavioral problems
  - Engage in no criminal activity
  - Demonstrate a stable home environment and good social relationships
  - Meet length of time in treatment requirements (outlined in the Table: Schedule of Maximal Take-Home Medications per42 CFR 8.12)
  - Provide assurance that take-home medication will be safely stored
  - Show that the rehabilitative benefit outweighs the risk of diversion

Additional guidance on the take-home criteria is available in the
Federal Guidelines for Opioid Treatment Programs – 2015
.

The most common reasons for submitting exception requests include:
  - A temporary increase in the number of take-home doses permitted for unsupervised use
  - An exception to the detoxification standards in the regulation

Exception Request for Variation from Detoxification Standards
-------------------------------------------------------------

Per
42 CFR 8.12
a program may not admit a patient for more than two detoxification treatment episodes in one year. Patients with two or more unsuccessful detoxification episodes within a 12-month period must be assessed by the OTP physician for other forms of treatment.

If, after this assessment, a physician believes it would be in the patient’s best interest to receive a third (or greater) detoxification treatment episode in one year, the physician can submit an exception request to SAMHSA and (where applicable) the state opioid treatment authority. The physician must:
  - Use form SMA-168 for the request
  - Justify the reason for requesting more than two detoxification episodes per year
  - Attest that the patient has been assessed for other forms of treatment

Exception Request for Other Reasons
-----------------------------------

Programs should submit an exception request for approval of any deviation from the federal opioid treatment standards in
42 CFR 8
.

How to Submit an Exception Request
----------------------------------

Exception requests must be made using Form SMA-168: Exception Request and Record of Justification. Login to the Extranet website to access Form SMA-168. This form must be submitted via the
SAMHSA OTP Extranet website
for review by both the
state opioid treatment authority
and SAMHSA.

All OTPs have an account on the
SAMHSA OTP Extranet website
. Exceptions can only be submitted by an OTP’s qualifying practitioner(s) who have submitting and approval authority.

For instructions on accessing your program’s account, contact the SAMHSA OTP Extranet Information Center at:
  - 866-348-5741
  - OTP-Help@jbsinternational.com
Last Updated
Last Updated: 11/06/2024