Banner
Title

Parent's Night Out - Talk. They Hear You
----------------------------------------
Body

Learn more about the “Talk. They Hear You.” campaign’s new “Parents’ Night Out” educational sessions and find out how to download them.

SAMHSA’s new “Talk. They Hear You.” campaign “Parents’ Night Out” educational sessions aim to inform parents and caregivers about the realities of underage drinking and other drug use, prepare them to talk with their kids about these issues, and motivate them to start these important conversations.

The “Parents’ Night Out” materials are intended to be used for community implementation of interactive, facilitator-led sessions that can be held either virtually or in person.
Comprehensive toolkits are available for download
and include all materials needed to implement either a single one hour-long “Parents’ Night Out” session or a series of three one hour-long program sessions. The “Parents’ Night Out” toolkits contain everything you need to plan, prepare, and host an event(s) in your community.

If you’ve already hosted a “Parents’ Night Out” event in your community, be sure to let us know how it went by filling out the brief
post-event online submission form
! The “Talk. They Hear You.” team is always looking to improve its campaign products and community engagement offerings, and with your feedback we’ll be able to do just that. By sharing your “Parents’ Night Out” event details you’ll also help us determine the overall appeal and reach of “Parents’ Night Out” across the nation. Thank you!

Questions? Send an email to
TTHYParentsNightOut@seiservices.com
.


Toolkits and One-Pagers
-----------------------

Access the “Parents’ Night Out” Toolkits

Download and Share the “Parents’ Night Out” One-Pager (Front Only | PDF | 424 KB)

Download and Share the “Parents’ Night Out” One-Pager (Front and Back | PDF | 719 KB)

Post-Event Online Submission Form
---------------------------------

Complete the “Parents’ Night Out” Post-event Online Submission Form
Last Updated
Last Updated: 11/05/2024