Title

Substance Use Disorder Treatment Options
----------------------------------------
Body MAT

The use of medications, in combination with
counseling and behavioral therapies
, to provide a “whole-patient” approach to the treatment of substance use disorders.
Medications
used are approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and are clinically driven and tailored to meet each patient’s needs.

Research shows that a combination of medication and therapy can successfully treat substance use disorders, and for some medications can help sustain recovery. Medications are also used to prevent or reduce opioid overdose.

The ultimate goal is full
recovery
, including the ability to live a self-directed life. This treatment approach has been shown to:
  - Improve patient survival
  - Increase retention in treatment
  - Decrease illicit opiate use and other criminal activity among people with substance use disorders
  - Increase patients’ ability to gain and maintain employment
  - Improve birth outcomes among women who have substance use disorders and are pregnant

Research also shows that these medications and therapies can contribute to lowering a person’s risk of contracting HIV or hepatitis C by reducing the potential for relapse. Learn more about substance misuse and how it relates to HIV, AIDS, and Viral Hepatitis.

Medications for Substance Use Disorders
---------------------------------------

The FDA approved several medications to treat alcohol use disorders (AUD) and opioid use disorders (OUD). These medications relieve the withdrawal symptoms and psychological cravings that cause chemical imbalances in the body. Medications used are evidence-based treatment options and do not just substitute one drug for another.

Medications for Alcohol Use Disorder (MAUD)
-------------------------------------------

Acamprosate, disulfiram, and
naltrexone
are the most common medications used to treat alcohol use disorder. They do not provide a cure for the disorder but are most effective for people who participate in a treatment program.

Medications for Opioid Use Disorder (MOUD)
------------------------------------------

Buprenorphine
,
methadone
, and
naltrexone
are the most common medications used to treat opioid use disorder (OUD). These medications help normalize brain chemistry, block the euphoric effects of alcohol and opioids, relieve physiological cravings, and restore normal body functions without the harmful effects of the substances. They are effective in treating OUD related to short-acting opioids such as heroin, morphine, and codeine, as well as semi-synthetic opioids like oxycodone and hydrocodone. These medications are safe for long-term use—ranging from months to a lifetime—but consult your doctor before discontinuing them.

What is Buprenorphine?
----------------------

Buprenorphine is the first medication to treat opioid use disorder (OUD) that can be prescribed or dispensed in physician offices, significantly increasing access to treatment.

What Is Methadone?
------------------

Methadone is a medication used to treat Opioid Use Disorder (OUD). Methadone is a long-acting full opioid agonist, and a schedule II controlled medication.

What Is Naltrexone?
-------------------

Intramuscular extended release naltrexone is a medication approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat both opioid use disorder (OUD) and alcohol use disorder (AUD).

Find Substance Use Disorder Treatment
-------------------------------------

There are many treatment options available for substance use disorders.
Body2

Child Safety
------------

It’s important to remember that if medications are allowed to be kept at home, they must be locked in a safe place away from children. Methadone in its liquid form is colored and can be mistaken for a fruit juice. Children who mistakenly take medications may overdose or have an adverse reaction. Assistance needs to be sought for any known or suspected accidental ingestion.

Prevent children from accidentally taking medication by storing it out of reach. For more information, visit CDC’s
Up and Away
educational campaign. For information on how to dispose of medications in your house, refer to FDA’s information
How to Safely Dispose of Unused or Expired Medicine
or
DEA’s drug disposal webpages
.

Low Barrier Models of Care
--------------------------

Low barrier care is a model for treatment that reduces requirements and restrictions that may limit access to care and increases access to treatment for individuals with substance use disorders. This approach meets individuals where they are and helps provide culturally sensitive care tailored to the unique circumstances and challenges that each person faces, improving treatment engagement and outcomes.

Learn more from SAMHSA’s
Advisory: Low Barrier Models of Care for Substance Use Disorders
.

Patient Rights
--------------

SAMHSA produced a brochure designed to
assist patients and to educate and inform others (PDF | 415 KB)
. Under the
Confidentiality Regulation, 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 2
, personally identifiable health information relating to substance use and alcohol treatment must be handled with a higher degree of confidentiality than other medical information.

Related Resources
-----------------
  - Alcohol misuse and AUD
  - Medication for the Treatment of Alcohol Use Disorder: A Brief Guide
  - TIP 49: Incorporating Alcohol Pharmacotherapies Into Medical Practice
  - TIP 63: Medications for Opioid Use Disorder
Opioid Overdose Prevention Medications

Opioid Overdose Prevention Medications
--------------------------------------

Naloxone and nalmefene
are both FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal medications (OORMs) that are used to prevent opioid overdose by reversing the toxic effects of the overdose. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), naloxone is one of a number of
medications considered essential to a functioning health care system
.
Last Updated
Last Updated: 04/11/2024